# Translation

The application is being designed and written in English and simultaneously being translated to French. As pages are created, updated, and corrected a translation process is periodically performed to bring the French text up to date. This document describes how that translation process is performed.

## Description Guidelines

By providing proper context, translators will be able to create more accurate translations. Tips to writing an effective description include:

- Limit the description to a single sentence
- Avoid referencing the component or the page where the string is located
- Avoid ending the description with a period or other punctuation

For contextual descriptions of images, there are additional resources available from [W3C](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/images).

## Tools

The i18n sub-project contains a script (`dist/cli.js`) to help manage the react-intl translations files. It has been written to run without any dependencies or compilation. It is expected to be used along with the [formatjs cli](https://formatjs.io/docs/tooling/cli).

### Bulk Translation

The checkIntl script can be run with different flags and options. For more details on how individual options work, see the checkIntl file itself. In practice, it is easiest to save the commands, with options included, as **package.json** scripts.

> [!NOTE]  
> Each sub-project using react-intl (e.g. packages/i18n, apps/web, etc.) requires its own set of commands, and must be managed separately.

For example, to ensure translations in the apps/web project are up to date:

1. Run `pnpm run intl-extract` in the project you are managing (in this case, apps/web).
2. Run `pnpm run check-intl:web` (from the root folder). This generates a **untranslated.json** file in the apps/web project's lang folder.
3. Send **untranslated.json** for translation. Refer to the instructions in the next section.
4. Save the translated version which comes back as **newTranslations.json** in the same lang folder.
5. Run `pnpm run check-intl-merge:web` (again from the root folder).
6. If you see any warnings about untranslated entries which simply match in English and French, add the key to the array in **whitelist.json** and repeat step 4.
7. Run `pnpm run intl-compile` in the root folder.

### Smaller Edits

Sometimes it is necessary to make smaller edits to English and French copy rather than bulk translations as described above. In this scenario it is often easier to make the changes manually rather than use the pnpm scripts. The workflow could look like this:

1. Find the English string in the source code and note the ID that has been automatically added by the linting tool.
2. Find the corresponding French string in the `fr.json` file with the same ID.
3. Edit the English string and note the new ID generated by the linting tool.
4. Edit the French string and apply the same new ID.
5. Sort the file by running `pnpm run check-intl:web` (or `:i18n`).

### On source control

Only **fr.json** and **whitelist.json** need to be checked into source control. The other files created during this process are generated as needed or only used to communicate with translators, should be added to .gitignore, and may be deleted after use.

## Requesting Translation Services

It is recommended to rename each **untranslated.json** file to something like **admin-english-to-french.txt** before sending to better identify the files for the translators. Here is a template that can be used to request translation services from your translation contact:

> Hi {translation contact},
>
> Could I please ask for your help arranging another round of translations for our website? I've attached several files from the project which need English to French translation. The process has not changed but could you please pass on these instructions?
>
> Please update the files in-place without changing any of the structure and formatting. The random-looking IDs and brackets are important to us. Only the strings identified as `defaultMessage` need to be translated. The ones labelled `description` are to give context to the translators and do not need to be translated.
>
> Some strings could have brace brackets inside them like `"Skill {skillId} not found."`. The words inside the brace brackets like `skillId` are parameter names and should not be translated. Similarly, tags like `strong` in `"You're about to <strong>remove the following user:</strong>"` should not be translated.
>
> Thanks for your help!
